Once around an interesting plutino.
So, what on earth is a plutino? Well, a
plutino is a body that orbits in a
position similar to that of Pluto.
Around the Sun beyond Neptune in the
Kuiper Belt and specifically in a three
to two orbital relationship with
Neptune. Two orbits of the plutino for
every three of Neptune. And that leads
to an alternating plus minus odd even
relationship where the gravitational
tug-of-war stabilizes the orbit because
each time the two objects meet
the
direction to Neptune is the opposite.
So, it keeps pulling it one way and then
pulling it back the other way next time
round.
And Pluto was the first to be found in
this sort of situation and is the
largest that we know of of dozens of
others that have been detected since.
This is the one that I'm going to talk
about today, imaged at the top there.
Given the catalog number 2002 XV93,
it was discovered in 2002 on the 10th of
December and the XV93
code tells you it was late in the year
because we number things or give them
designations starting at A, running
around the alphabet through Z,
going AA and running around again until
we've run out of letters
and then we start adding a number to
indicate how many times we've used the
pairs of letters up. So, this one's been
around the alphabet 93 times
and we start again in January. So, you
can see this was
one of the later objects discovered in
that year.
Discovered by
Chad Trujillo and Mike Brown using the
1.2 m telescope shown in the image
there.
But, having discovered it in 2002,
what they did was go back over older
photographic plates and look to see if
we could find pre-discovery images of it
from earlier dates. And that was done
all the way back to 1990,
where it had been imaged, but nobody had
realized what it was. And so, we now
have 12 years worth of position
information, and that lets us calculate
the orbit very nicely.
So, XV93
out there in the Kuiper Belt beyond
Neptune in a 2:3 resonance with Neptune
takes 246.3
years to go around. Neptune takes 165,
so you can see that ratio.
Um
elliptical orbit going from 34 and 1/2
to 44.2
astronomical units from the Sun. Neptune
is at 30, so it stays just outside
Neptune's orbit. Now, Pluto doesn't do
that. Pluto actually crosses Neptune's
orbit. So, there is a slight difference
there, but it's the 2:3 ratio that means
that we call it a plutino.
And tilted
to the main
elliptic path of the uh
planets, the ecliptic.
That is uh tilted about 13° similar to
Pluto, in fact.
So, physically quite a small body.
Here's uh
the sort of
diagram schematic showing
uh Pluto, XV
93, and Vesta to scale. Pluto diameter
2377 km,
Vesta 525, and XV93 just a little bit
less at 470.
So, a fifth the diameter of Pluto, and
we've just drawn a small gray circle
there because we don't have any really
good photographs of it. So, we're
assuming that it is approximately
spherical, but we don't know.
Uh Vesta is a little bit off round. It's
rather more ellipsoidal and has a
massive crater on one side of its nose
there.
Uh so, it's somewhat irregular, and that
for that reason didn't get elevated to
dwarf planet status, although I think
that was a bit harsh.
Um
XV 93, well, we'll see when we get
better images.
We don't know quite a lot about it. We
don't know the mass. We don't know
how it's spinning.
Um we're estimating the density is
likely to be a little bit greater than
that of water or water ice, perhaps ice
with mixed with some rock, and that
would lead to a surface gravity of 1/100
of a G on the surface of a small body
like this. So, a lot more to be filled
in there. What we can do, of course, is
look at the spectrum of the light.
And having done that, we first of all
seem to see a dark gray colored object,
not the reddish color that you sometimes
see in outer solar system objects. And
we can detect the
wave bands of water ice, probably carbon
dioxide ice, and some
other bands there, but no signs
specifically of methane, nitrogen, or
carbon monoxide. Perhaps those are too
volatile, and the gravity is not able to
hang on to them even at the relatively
low temperature there of somewhere in
the region of 40 to 50 Kelvin.
Now, the interesting part about this
object came in January of
and that was because its path took it in
front of a star in the constellation of
Auriga.
And so, as it did so, it would block the
star's light out,
a thing that we would call an
occultation. If the moon blocks the sun
out, we call it an eclipse, but this is
a body eclipsing some other distant
star, and so we have another name for
it, an occultation.
So,
this is can be very useful because
if you time the exact disappearance of a
star and the reappearance the far side,
you can extract some information.
And in particular, it's good thing to do
is to observe it from multiple different
points on the Earth and compare the
results.
And so, a study of this particular
predicted occultation went ahead and was
mostly based in Japan.
There was one observing site on the
university rooftop in Kyoto
and the
uh that was the 1.05 m Kiso Observatory
with its Schmidt telescope and a third
instrument, the 250 mm
so, 10-in amateur grade reflector
operated by an astronomer near
Fukushima. Actual amateur astronomer
joined in on the observations. And so,
this gave three separate tracks across
the line of sight shown in the map
there, so you can see Kyoto, Kiso, and
Fukushima. And the projected lines are
the tracks that this object was likely
to that be visible
carrying out the occultation.
And the result was that the Fukushima
telescope kind of missed the main event,
but the other two caught it properly.
The Fukushima telescope just probably
was too far north and got a grazing
occultation where its line of sight just
clipped the edge of the body going in
front of the star, whereas the other two
got full chords across the circular
diameter, giving two different
measurements of the object's size and
shape. A third one would have been
better, but we only got two.
And so it's somewhat difficult to pin it
down. It seems broadly spherical.
We can't tell if it's exactly spherical,
whether it's rough or smooth from the
data.
But we did find one thing
that is very very interesting indeed.
So, the star vanished for about 20
seconds, but in doing so, it didn't fade
equally everywhere. And from one of the
observations, the one shown in green,
the light dropped
not suddenly, but over a period of 1.5
seconds. The other one you can see was
the Fukushima one at the top in purple
there, which was just grazed the top of
the object. And there was a slight drop
in the light, but not enough to really
be sure of anything. But the
Kyoto and Kiso observatories saw the
light drop, but it wasn't a sharp edge.
It dropped over a period of 1 and 1/2
seconds. And this is suggestive that
there is an atmosphere. And as in the
artist's impression at the top there,
the light took 1 and 1/2 seconds to dim
and 1 and 1/2 seconds to re-emerge
through the effects of that envelope of
gas around the object.
And so, from that, we think that there
is an atmosphere 36 km deep. And the
reason that we get that number is
because a full occultation was 20
seconds.
And if you do the maths, 1.5 seconds out
of 20 seconds is 7 and 1/2% and so, 7
and 1/2% of a uh the diameter of the
object being 480 km, you get 36K for the
depth of the atmosphere.
Very straightforward calculation.
Now, this is a very thin atmosphere.
It's
just over 1% that of Pluto's. Um 1 over
8 millionth of the density of the air
around us on the Earth. So,
not
exactly anything to really get too
excited about, but an atmosphere
nonetheless. And that's quite
interesting because this is a very small
body out in the cold there, and no one
was really expecting there to be much
chance for such a body to hang on to an
atmosphere.
It's too close to be a set of rings. Um
there was no gap between it and the
solid edge of the planet. We have
detected occultations where we've seen
dips in the light that have gone back to
full power before the main body has gone
in front, and that's been indicative of
rings of matter in orbit around a body,
but not in this case.
So,
that atmosphere
can be modeled and bearing in mind the
temperature and the density estimates,
it's
probable that it's methane. It might be
nitrogen with some methane. It might be
carbon monoxide with some methane at
those pressures, 124, 177, and 159
nanobars. Very low pressure indeed. And
there could well be fog and inversion
layer
where the upper atmospheric heating of
the methane gas
is trapping a layer below it.
But the interesting thing is really how
come it's there at all.
The low gravity, 1/100 of the Earth's
gravity, should allow molecules to
escape easily even at the temperature of
just 50 Kelvin. The molecules should be
able to pick up enough speed that they
would achieve escape velocity and just
hurtle off into space never to come
back. Um remember temperature is just
the average kinetic energy of
uh a gas and the kinetic energy of a gas
is half the molecular weight times the
square of the velocity. So, if you
increase the temperature, the molecules
move faster.
And the calculations for all of this,
which I won't bore you with right now,
tell us that all that gas should be gone
in between 100 and 1,000 years. It
should all leak to space in that time.
Now,
we've had a uh
follow-up observation with James Webb.
The JWST turned its mighty power on the
object and it can't find any sign of
frozen material
uh volatiles of methane and carbon
monoxide on the surface
that might be feeding the atmosphere.
So, it's strange that the atmosphere is
there.
One option is that this was a temporary
atmosphere created by a comet strike.
Perhaps another object recently smashed
into
XV93
and blasted the material out, which is
now still hanging around. Now, if that's
the case, it must have happened in the
last 100 to 1,000 years or so. So, very,
very recent in astronomical terms. Um
and follow-up observations
of the atmosphere, if we can make them,
should allow us to see if that
atmosphere is indeed declining and
leaking away to space.
Now, the other possibility is that the
atmosphere is being replenished from
underground by low-temperature
volcanoes.
Cryovolcanoes,
geysers spewing liquid nitrogen or other
volatile material, as we have seen on
the surface of Neptune's moon Triton.
So, maybe XV93 is very similar to Triton
and is
spewing out volatile materials to
replenish the atmosphere, even though
it's bleeding away into space.
And if that was the case, then follow-up
observations of the atmosphere might
reveal it with no overall net decline in
the years, maybe some seasonal changes
in
the amount of material in the atmosphere
as the temperature of the object changes
based on its elliptical orbit carrying
it nearer or further from the Sun.
So,
it'll take quite some time for us to
observe that because it's going to take
100 years before it's really changed its
orbit position enough for us to have a
lot of good data on that.
But anyway, I thought XV93
made for a very interesting story,
especially around how we can use the
passage of these objects in front of
other stars to learn about their
atmospheric composition. So, that's it
for this one. Thanks very much for
listening, and I hope you've enjoyed it.